$Id$

== Information for installing GMT 5 ==

Note: The build system has recently been switched to CMake which is a
cross-platform system for managing the build process. If you are familiar
with the old GNU Build Tools (automake, autoconf, and configure) you can
probably skip over to the CMake quick start guide in README.CMake.


Introduction
------------

You do not need to read these instructions unless you plan to build and
install the programs manually.

GMT has been installed successfully under Unix/Linux/OS X on workstations
from Sun, Silicon Graphics, Cray, DEC, HP, Data General, IBM, Apple, NEXT,
as well on any number of PC clones running Linux.  It also installs under
WIN32 and in Unix emulators such as Cygwin on PCs and Machten on Macs.
We anticipate few problems if you are installing the package on other platforms.
Should you need to make small modifications, e.g., not use certain
include files, please let us know so that future releases will be even
more portable.  This is likely to mean that your platform is not
POSIX compliant.  For a non-UNIX solution, see Appendix L for options
and installation details.

Note there are two GMT tar archives available:

1. gmt-5.0.0b.tar.bz2:          The GMT distribution
2. gshhg-gmt-nc4-2.2.1.tar.bz2: All five resolutions of GSHHG coastline data

The archives are available in bzip2 (*.bz2) format.
If you do not have bzip2 installed you can obtain source or executables
from http://www.bzip.org.

For Windows users there are separate Windows installers available; this
discussion only considers UNIX/Linux/OS X installations. Windows users who
which to build GMT from the sources refer to README.WIN32.


CMake
-----

Install CMake (>=2.8.5) from http://www.cmake.org/cmake/resources/software.html


Install netCDF library
----------------------

Get and install netCDF from http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/downloads/netcdf/.
You need at least version 3.6.3 but we recommend installing version 4.

For all major Linux distributions there are prepackaged development binaries
available. netCDF is also available on MacOSX trough the macports and fink
package managers.


GDAL (optional)
---------------

To use the GDAL interface (ability to provide grids or images to be imported
via gdal) you must have the GDAL library and include files installed. Please
report any problems or limitations that you might experience as this is an
optional and experimental feature.

Like netCDF, GDAL is available through your favorite package manager on many
*NIX systems.


Install support data
--------------------

You can obtain GMT from gmt.soest.hawaii.edu. Alternatively you may ftp GMT
from pub/gmt on any of the following sites. Try the site that is closest to
you to minimize transmission times:

Site                                    FTP address
--------------------------------------------------------------
SOEST, U. of Hawaii                     gmt.soest.hawaii.edu
Lab for Satellite Altimetry, NOAA       ibis.grdl.noaa.gov
IRIS, Washington, US                    ftp.iris.washington.edu
IAG-USP, U. of Sao Paulo, BRAZIL        ftp.iag.usp.br
Dep. Geology, U. in Oslo, NORWAY        ftp.geologi.uio.no
ISV, Hokkaido U, Sapporo, JAPAN         ftp.eos.hokudai.ac.jp
U of Sydney, Sydney, AUSTRALIA          mirror.geosci.usyd.edu.au
GDS, Vienna U. of Technology, AUSTRIA   gd.tuwien.ac.at
TENET, Tertiary Education & Research Networks, SOUTH AFRICA
                                        gmt.mirror.ac.za

The development sources are available from the subversion repository at
svn://gmtserver.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt5/trunk

Extract the files and put them in a separate directory (need not be
where you eventually want to install GMT).


Configuring
-----------

GMT can be build on any platform supported by CMake. CMake is a cross-platform,
open-source system for managing the build process. Refer to the documentation
at http://www.cmake.org/ for further details. In the source tree copy
cmake/ConfigUserTemplate.cmake to cmake/ConfigUser.cmake and edit the file
according to your demands.

By default, GMT will use Dave Watson's Delaunay triangulation routine.
However, a much faster alternative is available from Jonathan Shewchuk, but
his routine is not distributed under the GNU Public License.  If you work for
a for-profit organization you should read Shewchuk's copyright statement (in
src/triangle.c) first.  If you agree with the license terms you can enable
Shewchuk's triangulation routine cmake/ConfigUser.cmake.

At run-time, GMT will initialize all default variables by reading
either the share/gmtdefaults_SI or the share/gmtdefaults_US file.
Both are installed, and the one that is read is given by the file
share/gmt.conf.  This file will have either SI or US as the first
two columns on a line.  SI is default. You can configure the default
at build time in cmake/ConfigUser.cmake.

The default values differ slightly between SI and US, mostly because
it is inconvenient to convert, say, 1" to 2.54 cm; we use 2.5 cm
instead.  Although strongly discouraged, if you want to make
permanent changes to some of the defaults you can edit the
gmtdefaults_{SI,US} files directly.  A much better approach is to
create a .gmtdefaults4 file in your home directory and edit those
settings since GMT will check for that file before loading system
defaults (actually, it will first look in the current directory,
then the home directory, and then finally in share).  See the gmtdefaults
man page for a description of all defaults.

To prevent two GMT processes writing to the same .gmtcommands4 file
simultaneously (thereby corrupting it), GMT can implement the POSIX
advisory file locking scheme and sets and releases locks on these
files.  Under GNU/Linux, this does not work when the files reside
in directories mounted with NFS.  Since it works with NFS under
other UNIX systems we suspect this is a [temporary] limitation of GNU
NSF.  If you want to activate file locking you may enable it in
cmake/ConfigUser.cmake.

GMT can produce either Freeform PostScript (suitable to be sent to
various printers) or Encapsulated PostScript (suitable to be included
in another document).  True PS files will use the setpagedevice
PostScript command to manipulate paper trays and manual feeds
on selected printers.  Some PostScript previewers (such as Sun's
old pageview) do not understand these commands and will abort; this
is also true of some PS to raster conversion utilities.  On the other
hand, EPS files are intended to be included in another document and
are not allowed to use setpagedevice.  To simplify printing, EPS files
are allowed to contain a showpage operator which means EPS files will
print if sent to a printer.  The PAPER_MEDIA setting in .gmtdefaults4
can be set to one or the other format (see man gmtdefaults).  By
default GMT will produce PS files.

We provide two install modes via CMake: You have the choice between a
monolithic installation (GMT_INSTALL_MONOLITHIC=ON) where everything goes
into a common subdirectory, or a distribution-like installation
(PREFIX/bin/gmt-VERSION, PREFIX/lib/gmt-VERSION/, PREFIX/share/gmt-VERSION/,
PREFIX/share/doc/gmt-VERSION/).

The top-level installation directory is configured with the variable
CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX.

Now that you made your configuration choices it is time for invoking CMake.
In the source tree, create a subdirectory where the build files will be
generated, e.g., 'mkdir build'.

In the build subdirectory, type

  cmake [options] ..

Append any of the options explained above as you see fit.  If CMake cannot
figure out all the dependent libraries or required compiler and linker flags
it will give you a message and you will be asked to edit
cmake/ConfigUser.cmake.


Build GMT
---------

In the build directory, type

  make -jx
  make -jx manpages_all

which will compile all the programs and create the manual pages. You can
define the number of jobs to run simultaneously by make with the -jx option,
where x is typically the number of CPUs. After a successful compilation you
may install the executables in the designated bin directory with the command

  make -jx install

After a successful install you can have the object files and the local
executables removed by saying

  make clean

or just remove the entire build directory.


Documentation
_____________

The documentation is available online at http://gmt.soest.hawaii.edu/
or as platform independent package that you can install along with GMT.

The development sources from subversion does not contain the precompiled
documentation in PDF format. The PDFs have to be created from source with
LaTeX (e.g., TeX Live).

The GMT documentation includes HTML files for online browsing, user guide,
cookbook, and manual pages. The Documentation also contains the
GMT_Tutorial.pdf file which is a short course in how to use GMT.  It can be
followed individually or in a lab setting by a group of users.

While these are available from the main GMT home page in Hawaii, users may
find it convenient to install these pages locally for added speed.  The
subdirectories contain both HTML and PDF versions of the cookbook, and HTML
versions of the manual pages.  All users need to do is to add a browser
bookmark to the top-level file doc/html/gmt_services.html. To install all
documentation in your chosen directory, type

  make gmt_pdf_manpages
  make gmt_doc
  make gmt_doc_shrink
  make install


Set path
--------

Make sure users set their PATH to include the directory containing
the GMT executables (BINDIR) if this is not a standard directory
like /usr/local/bin.  You should now be able to run GMT programs.


GMT supplemental Code
---------------------

GMT users elsewhere have developed programs that utilize the GMT
libraries and produce PostScript code compatible with the rest of
GMT or simply perform data manipulation.  In addition, misc.
code developed by us depend on GMT libraries.
Currently, the supplemental archive include the directories:

  dbase     - Data extractor for global gridded data sets such
              as those on CD-ROM from NGDC.
  gshhs     - Data extractor for GSHHS shoreline polygons.
  imgsrc    - Data extractor for Smith/Sandwell altimetry grids.
  meca      - Plotting of focal mechanisms, velocity arrows,
              and error ellipses on maps.
  mex       - Matlab or Octave mex files for grid file I/O.
  mgg       - Programs for MGD-77 data in .gmt format.
  mgd77     - Programs for handling of native MGD77 files.
  misc      - psmegaplot, makepattern, gmtdigitize,
              gmtstitch, gmtdp, and nc2xy
  segyprogs - Plotting SEGY seismic data sets.
  sph       - Spherical interpolation and triangulation.
  spotter   - Plate tectonic & kinematics applications.
  x2sys     - Track intersection (crossover) tools.
  x_system  - Track intersection (crossover) tools (old version).
  xgrid     - X11 editor for grid files.

These are installed automatically, except for mex and xgrid which
requires more configuration as they depend on non-GMT libraries.


Example Scripts
---------------

   A complete set of the example scripts used to create all the
example plots, including all necessary data files, are provided by
the installation; you can run all the examples from the
src directory using CTest (enable in cmake/ConfigUser.cmake)

	make check


Misc
----

Before running programs, there are a few things you should do/know:

  - Read carefully the documentation for the gmt system.  This can be
    found as both PDF and HTML files in the doc/pdf|html directories.
    The successful operation of gmt-programs depends directly on your
    understanding of how gmt "works", its option lists, I/O, and composite
    plot mechanisms.  Then, before running individual gmt programs, read
    the associated man page.

  - Do not confuse the GMT-system with the GMT-database that was
    initiated at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.  These
    marine geophysical data files (Gravity, Magnetics, Topography)
    are NOT distributed with the GMT-system!  [However, programs that
    deal with gmt-files can be found in the supplemental tar archive.


A reminder
----------

   If you think it is appropriate, you may consider paying us back
by including our latest EOS article (Wessel, P. and W. H. F. Smith,
New, improved version of the Generic Mapping Tools released, EOS Trans.
AGU, 79, 579, 1998, and our Geophysics article on the gridding algorithm
in surface (Smith, W. H. F. and P. Wessel, Gridding with continuous
curvature splines in tension, Geophysics, 55, 293-305, 1990) in the
reference list of your future publications that will benefit from the
availability of GMT.


Software support
----------------

   You haven't bought anything so you cannot expect full service.
However, if you find a bug in any of the programs, please report
it to us (gmtrac.soest.hawaii.edu) rather than trying to fix it yourself
so that we, and through us, other users may benefit from your find.
Make sure you provide us with enough information so that we can recreate
the problem.
	Please register via the GMT web page (gmt.soest.hawaii.edu).
Two mailing lists of interest to GMT users are available:  gmt-group@lists.hawaii.edu
allows us to notify registered users in the event of bugfixes
and/or new releases.  A separate mailing list (gmt-help@lists.hawaii.edu) exists
for GMT users who have questions about GMT installation and usage.  If you want
to subscribe to one or both of these mailinglists, send a message to
listproc@hawaii.edu that contains one or both of the commands

subscribe gmt-help <yourname, not email address>
subscribe gmt-group <yourname, not email address>

You may post messages to gmt-help while gmt-group is more of a one-way street
for us to inform users of bug fixes and upgrades.  The online registration
also lets you subscribe to the two mailinglists.


Ordering the GMT package on CD/DVD-Rs
-------------------------------------

Should you or someone you know without net-access need to obtain GMT:
Geoware makes and distributes CD/DVD-Rs with the GMT package and many
useful data sets.  For more details and a full description of the data
sets (up to 60 Gb of data!) visit www.geoware-online.com


Good luck!

The GMT Team.

vim: tw=78 et ts=2 sts=2 sw=2 autoindent smartindent
